In terms of a single neuron’s long-distance communication, interpulse intervals (IPIs) are an attractive alternative to rate and binary codes. As a proxy for an IPI, a neuron’s time-to-spike can be found in the biophysical and experimental intracellular literature. Using the current, consensus layer V pyramidal neuron, the present study examines the feasibility of IPI-coding and examines the noise sources that limit the information rate of such an encoding. In descending order of importance, the noise sources are (i) synaptic variability, (ii) sodium channel shot-noise, followed by (iii) thermal noise. The biophysical simulations allow the calculation of mutual information, which is about 3.0 bits/spike. More importantly, while, by any conventional definition, the biophysical model is highly nonlinear, the underlying function that relates input intensity to the defined output variable is linear. When one assumes the perspective of a neuron coding via first hitting-time, this result justifies a pervasive and simplifying assumption of computational modelers—that a class of cortical neurons can be treated as linearly additive, computational devices.

In many theories of neural computation, linearly summed synaptic activation is a pervasive assumption for the computations performed by individual neurons. Indeed, for certain nominally optimal models, linear summation is required. However, the biophysical mechanisms needed to produce linear summation may add to the energy-cost of neural processing. Thus, the benefits provided by linear summation may be outweighed by the energy-costs. Using voltage-gated conductances in a relatively simple neuron model, this paper quantifies the cost of linearizing dendritically localized synaptic activation. Different combinations of voltage-gated conductances were examined, and many are found to produce linearization; here, four of these models are presented. Comparing the energy-costs to a purely passive model, reveals minimal or even no additional costs in some cases.

We present a deep structured learning method for neuron segmentation from 3D electron microscopy (EM) which improves significantly upon the state of the art in terms of accuracy and scalability. Our method consists of a 3D U-Net classifier predicting affinity graphs on voxels, followed by iterative region agglomeration. We train the U-Net using a new structured loss based on MALIS that encourages topological correctness. Our extension consists of two parts: First, an O(nlog(n)) method to compute the loss gradient, improving over the originally proposed O(n2) algorithm. Second, we compute the gradient in two separate passes to avoid spurious contributions in early training stages. Our affinity predictions are accurate enough that simple agglomeration outperforms more involved methods used earlier on inferior predictions. We present results on three datasets (CREMI, FIB, and SegEM) of different imaging techniques and animals and achieve improvements over previous results of 27%, 15%, and 250%. Our findings suggest that a single 3D segmentation strategy can be applied to both isotropic and anisotropic EM data. The runtime of our method scales with O(n) in the size of the volume and achieves a throughput of about 2.6 seconds per megavoxel, allowing processing of very large datasets.

Determining functional brain connectivity is crucial to understanding the brain and neural differences underlying disorders such as autism. Recent studies have used Gaussian graphical models to learn brain connectivity via statistical dependencies across brain regions from neuroimaging. However, previous studies often fail to properly incorporate priors tailored to neuroscience, such as preferring shorter connections. To remedy this problem, the paper here introduces a novel, weighted-ℓ1, multi-task graphical model (W-SIMULE). This model elegantly incorporates a flexible prior, along with a parallelizable formulation. Additionally, W-SIMULE extends the often-used Gaussian assumption, leading to considerable performance increases. Here, applications to fMRI data show that W-SIMULE succeeds in determining functional connectivity in terms of (1) log-likelihood, (2) finding edges that differentiate groups, and (3) classifying different groups based on their connectivity, achieving 58.6\% accuracy on the ABIDE dataset. Having established W-SIMULE's effectiveness, it links four key areas to autism, all of which are consistent with the literature. Due to its elegant domain adaptivity, W-SIMULE can be readily applied to various data types to effectively estimate connectivity.

Although several measurements and analyses support the idea that the brain is energy-optimized, there is one disturbing, contradictory observation: In theory, computation limited by thermal noise can occur as cheaply as ~2.9⋅10−21 joules per bit (kTln2). Unfortunately, for a neuron the ostensible discrepancy from this minimum is startling - ignoring inhibition the discrepancy is 107 times this amount and taking inhibition into account >109. Here we point out that what has been defined as neural computation is actually a combination of computation and neural communication: the communication costs, transmission from each excitatory postsynaptic activation to the S4-gating-charges of the fast Na+ channels of the initial segment (fNa's), dominate the joule-costs. Making this distinction between communication to the initial segment and computation at the initial segment (i.e., adding up of the activated fNa's) implies that the size of the average synaptic event reaching the fNa's is the size of the standard deviation of the thermal noise. Moreover, defining computation as the addition of activated fNa's, yields a biophysically plausible mechanism for approaching the desired minimum. This mechanism, requiring something like the electrical engineer's equalizer (not much more than the action potential generating conductances), only operates at threshold. This active filter modifies the last few synaptic excitations, providing barely enough energy to allow the last sub-threshold gating charge to transport. That is, the last, threshold-achieving S4-subunit activation requires an energy that matches the information being provided by the last few synaptic events, a ratio that is near kTln2 joules per bit.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive predictive performance due to their ability to learn complex, non-linear relationships between variables. However, the inability to effectively visualize these relationships has led to DNNs being characterized as black boxes and consequently limited their applications. To ameliorate this problem, we introduce the use of hierarchical interpretations to explain DNN predictions through our proposed method, agglomerative contextual decomposition (ACD). Given a prediction from a trained DNN, ACD produces a hierarchical clustering of the input features, along with the contribution of each cluster to the final prediction. This hierarchy is optimized to identify clusters of features that the DNN learned are predictive. Using examples from Stanford Sentiment Treebank and ImageNet, we show that ACD is effective at diagnosing incorrect predictions and identifying dataset bias. Through human experiments, we demonstrate that ACD enables users both to identify the more accurate of two DNNs and to better trust a DNN’s outputs. We also find that ACD’s hierarchy is largely robust to adversarial perturbations, implying that it captures fundamental aspects of the input and ignores spurious noise.